 
 
CDSL:  your depository                                                                                                                                        Page 1 of 1 
KEYWORD:   SEBI       
Central Depository Services (India) Limited  
                 Convenient      Dependable      Secure  
COMMUNIQUÉ TO DEPOSITORY PARTICIPANTS  
 
 
 CDSL/OPS/ DP/POLCY/202 4/612                                                          October 15, 2024  
 
SEBI  CIR - Monitoring Shareholding of Market Infrastructure Institutions . 
 
DPs are advised to refer to the SEBI Circular  no.  SEBI/HO/MRD/MRD -PoD-3/P/CIR/2024/139  
dated  October 14, 2024 , regarding  Monitoring Shareholding of Market Infrastructure 
Institutions (MIIs) . [refer Annexure]  
 
DPs are advised to take note of the same . 
 
Queries regarding this communiqué may be addressed to: CDSL – Helpdesk Emails may be 
sent to: dprtasupport@cdslindia.com  and connect through our IVR Number 022 -62343333 . 
 
For and on behalf of  
Central Depository Services (India) Limited  
 
sd/- 
 
Nilesh Shah  
Asst. Vice President  
 
 
  
Page 1 of 7 
   
CIRCULAR  
 
SEBI/HO/ MRD/MRD -PoD-3/P/CIR/2024/ 139                               October 14 , 2024          
 
To  
 
All Recognized Stock Exchanges   
All Recognized Clearing Corporations  
All Depositories  
All Registrar and Transfer Agents  
 
Sir/Madam,  
 
Subject: Monitoring Shareholding of Market Infrastructure Institutions (MIIs )  
 
1. Paragraph 2.4 of Chapter 6 of SEBI Master Circular No. SEBI/HO/MRD2/PoD -
2/CIR/P/2023/171  dated October 16, 2023 for ‘Stock Exchanges and Clearing 
Corporations’ , paragraph 4.76 of Section 4 of SEBI Master Circular No. 
SEBI/HO/MRD/MRD -PoD-2/P/CIR/2023/166 dated October 06, 2023  for 
‘Depositories ’ and paragraph s 15.1.1 (IV) & (V) of Chapter 15 of SEBI Master 
Circular No.  SEBI/HO/MRD/MRD -PoD-1/P/CIR/2023/136  dated August 04, 2023 
for ‘Commodity Derivatives Segment’  prescribes  the procedure for ensuring 
compliance with Securities Contracts (Regulation) (Stock Exchanges and Clearing 
Corporation) Regulations, 2018 (‘SECC Regul ations, 2018 ’) by listed Stock 
Exchanges.   
 
2. SEBI vide letter dated July 17, 2017 addressed to depositories and stock 
exchanges issued guidelines on monitoring of ownership and other provisions of 
the Securities Contracts (Regulation) (Stock Exchanges and Clearing 
Corporations) Regulations, 201 2 and SEBI (Depositories and Participants) 
Regulations, 2012 for listed stock exchanges and listed depositories . 
 
3. In order to ensure ease of compliance and effective monitoring of the provisions  
related to minimum pub lic shareholding, other  shareholding limits and fit & proper 
criteria under  SECC Regulations, 2018 and SEBI (Depositories and Participants) 
Regulations, 2018 ( D&P Regulations, 2018 ) by Stock Exchanges, Clearing 
Corporations and Depositories (collectively r eferred as Market Infrastructure 
Institutions (MIIs)) , based on the recommendations of Secondary Markets Advisory 
Committee  of SEBI and subsequent deliberations , it has been decided  that –  
  
Page 2 of 7 
 3.1. The framework for monitoring and ensuring compliance with shareholding norms 
currently applicable to listed Stock Exchanges and listed Depositories shall be 
applicable to all  MIIs (i.e. both listed and unlisted) ; and   
 
3.2. All MIIs shall disclose their shareholding pattern as per the requirements and 
format s specified for listed companies  under SEBI (Listing Obligations and 
Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015 ( LODR Regulations, 2015 ) on their 
respective websites .  
 
4. In view of the above, the framework for  monitoring of the shareholding norms of 
MIIs is as under :  
 
4.1. Every MII shall appoint a depository as “Designated Depository  (DD) ” for the 
purpose of monitoring of the ir shareholding  limits as per SECC Regulations, 
2018 and D &P Regulations, 2018 , as applicable . The DD of an MII, shall not be 
an associate (as defined under SECC Regulations, 2018) of the MII. In case of 
depository, the other depository shall be appointed as DD for monitoring its 
shareholding limits.  
 
However, in case the ISIN of any MII is frozen for debits by the company  (MII), 
the appointment of DD is not required for monitoring the shareholding limits  of 
that MII. In such case, the MII shall verify the shareholding limits prior to recording 
the transfer of its shares.  
 
4.2. All MIIs shall disclose their shareholding with category wise breakup  as per the 
requirements and formats specified for listed companies under SEBI (Listing 
Obligations and Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015 (LODR 
Regulations, 2015) on a quarterly basis on their respective websites. In case of 
listed MII, the stock exchange where the shares are listed, shall also display the 
above information.  
 
4.3. The MIIs shall at the time of appointment of the DD provide the details of paid -
up equity share capital including the number of shares to the  DD and as and 
when there are changes, the same shall be informed to the DD  on End of Day 
(EoD) basis . 
 
4.4. The DD shall monitor and inform the  MII and stock exchange on which its shares 
are listed (in case of listed MII), as and when the threshold limit of 5%  or 15%, 
as applicable under SECC Regulations, 2018 and D&P  Regulations, 2018, is 
breached and take appropriate consequential actions, as mentioned at 
paragraph 4.9 of this circular.  
  
Page 3 of 7 
 4.5. The DD shall monitor and inform  the MII and stock exchange on which its shares 
are listed (in case of listed MII), as and when  threshold limit of combined holding 
of 49% of all persons’ resident outside India (directly or indirectly, either  
individually  or together with persons acting in concert ) in the paid -up equity share 
capital of  an MII is breached and take consequential action s as mentioned at 
paragraph 4.9 of this circular.  
 
4.6. For Stock Exchanges : 
 
4.6.1.  The DD shall: 
 
4.6.1.1.  Have mechanism for coordination between the depositories for sharing of 
information regarding the shareholding of the stock exchange and ensure 
that the shareholding of Trading Members  (TMs) , their associates and 
agents does  not exceed 49 % of the paid-up equity share cap ital of the stock 
exchange .  
 
4.6.1.2.  Monitor the aggregate shareholding limit of the TMs, their associates and 
agents based on their demat balance , on a daily basis, at the end of the day . 
At the time of appointments of DD , all stock exchanges shall share the list of 
TMs,  their associates and agents  including their PANs , contact details, e -
mail IDs  with the DD and subsequent changes there off shall also be 
informed to the DD to facilitate monitoring of demat balances . Stock 
exchanges shall give suitable instruc tions to their members to provide the 
details of their associates & agents and subsequent changes, if any.  
 
4.6.1.3.  Generate aggregate shareholding reports of TMs, their associates and 
agents on daily basis . The report  shall be shared  with the stock  exchange , 
its Registrar & Transfer Agent (RTA), the stock exchange where it is listed  
(in case of listed stock exchange)  and other depository.  Post receipt of such 
report from DD, the stock exchange shall disseminate the aggregate 
shareholding percentage of TM s, their a ssociates and agents  on its website 
on a daily basis.  
 
4.6.1.4.  Send alerts to the stock exchange and TMs, their associates and agents  
about the breach of the caution shareholding limit of 45% by TMs, their 
associates and agents  and the said information shall also be disclosed on 
the exchange website and the website of stock exchange where it is listed 
(in case of listed stock exchange) .  
 
4.6.1.5.  Inform to the stock exchange, its RTA, the stock exchange where it is listed 
(in case of listed stock exchange) and other depository  about any breach of  
Page 4 of 7 
 shareholding limit of 49% by TMs, their associates and agents.  Stock 
exchange shall disseminate such  breach on its website  and the website of 
stock exchange where it is listed (in case of listed stoc k exchange) .  
 
4.6.2.  The other depository shall provide on a daily basis the demat holdings of each 
TMs, their associates and agents  in the stock exchange (s) held in its system at 
the End of Day  (EOD) to the DD for computation of shareholding.  
 
4.6.3.  The TMs, their associates and agents  shall obtain prior approval of the stock 
exchange (s) before  acquisition of further shares, once the aggregate 
shareholding of all TMs,  their associates and agents crosses the caution limit 
of 45 %. The stock exchange shall provide to t he DD the list of PANs which have 
sought approval for fresh purchases in the ISIN which has reached the caution 
limit. Such fresh purchases by a TM, their associates and agents  who has 
obtained approval shall be marked as 'Approval obtaine d from Exchange'.  In 
case any of the  TMs, their associates and agents purchase  shares without such 
approval of the stock exchange, the DD shall inform the same to the stock 
exchange and shall initiate appropriat e consequential action as mentioned at 
paragraph 4.9 of this circular.  
 
4.6.4.  The TMs,  their associates and agents shall also refer to the aggregate 
shareholding pattern under the category of TMs, their associates and agents, 
to determine/ascertain the available head room before placing the order.  
 
4.7. For recognized Clearing Corporations  (CCs)  
 
4.7.1.  The DD shall monitor that at least 51% of paid -up equity share capital of a CC 
shall always be held by one or more recognized stock exchange(s) and  no 
recogni zed stock exchange shall, directly or indirectly, either i ndividually or 
together with persons acting in concert, acquire or hold more than 15 % of the 
paid-up equity share capital in more than one CC  and take consequential 
actions as mentioned at paragraph 4.9 of this circular in case of any breach.  
 
However, the provision at paragraph 4.7.1 would not be applicable to AMC 
Repo Clearing Limited (ARCL).  
 
4.8. Fit and Proper  
 
4.8.1.  All the shareholders should be fit and proper persons  at all time s. For 
shareholding of a person who directly or indirectly, acquires or  holds two 
percent  or more equity shares or voting rights of  any recognized stock  
Page 5 of 7 
 exchange  or depository , the MII shall ensure that such shareholders are fit and 
proper at all times . 
 
4.8.2.  The MIIs shall notify on its website and undertake all measures to make 
investors aware of the requirement of eligibility for acquiring or holding its 
shares  and fit and proper criteria for being its shareholders as per Regulation 
19 and 20 of SECC Regulations, 2018 and Regulations 22 and 23 of D&P 
Regulations, 2018, as applic able.  
 
4.8.3.  In the pre -listing scenario, the exchange  and depository  coming out with a 
public offering shall include a declaration in the application form stating that the 
applicant is fit and proper in terms of Regulation 19 and 20 of SECC 
Regulations , 201 8 and Regulations 22 and 23 of D&P Regulations, 2018 , as 
applicable . 
 
4.8.4.  In the post listing scenario, a reference of the applicable Regulation with regard 
to fit and proper (by mentioning the URL/weblink of Regulation 19 and 20 of the 
SECC Regulations, 2018 ; and R egulations 22 and 23 of D&P Regulations, 
2018)  shall be made part of the contract note.  
 
4.8.5.  The listed stock exchange and listed depository and the stock exchange where 
the shares are listed shall notify on their websites that the shares of the listed 
stock exchange  and listed depository  shall only be dealt by fit and proper 
persons as per Regulation 19 and 20 of SECC Regulations , 2018 and 
Regulations 22 and 23 of D&P Regulations, 2018 , as applicable . 
 
4.8.6.  The MIIs shall submit to SEBI on a quarterly basis an exceptional report 
regarding the shareholders who are not fit and proper and action taken there of 
as per the format given below:  
 
Sl. 
No. Name of the 
Shareholder  Nature of Shareholder 
(Person resident India/ 
Person resident outside 
India)  % 
Holding  Reason for not fit 
and proper and 
action taken 
thereof  
     
     
 
4.9. Freezing of Voting Rights and Corporate Benefits  
 
4.9.1.  Upon breach of the fit and proper criteria ; and various threshold limits for 
shareholding of MIIs, the DD shall apply ISIN level freeze on the demat 
account  of the  relevant shareholder  for the excess shareholding  and inform 
the respective MII and RTA to  disable e -voting for the account holder on  
Page 6 of 7 
 EoD basis . The DD shall  initiate the freezing of corporate  benefits , in the 
manner described below:  
 
4.9.1.1.  With respect to freezing of voting rights, the DD shall inform the MII , RTA  
and the other depository about  the breach by the shareholders  on EoD basis . 
The MII in consultation with the DD  and RTA shall also disable the e -voting of 
the shareholder  for the portion of the shareholding in excess of the regulatory 
requirement  and the MII shall ensure that the shareholder's vote for such 
excess shareholding is not considered in the regular voting process.  
 
4.9.1.2.  With respect to corporate benefits, the DD shall inform the list of shareholders 
whose corporate benefits are to be frozen, to the M II and other depository  on 
EoD basis . The MII  or its RTA shall transfer  the corporate benefits (dividend) 
of such share holders on th e portion of shareholding in excess of the regulatory 
requirement  to their Investor Protection Fund (IPF) (for stock exchanges and 
depositories) and Settlement Guarantee Fund (SGF) (for CCs) . 
 
4.9.2.  The divestment of any excess shareholding in a listed MII beyond the specified 
limit would be through a special window provided by the stock exchange where 
the shares of MII are listed. However, any excess shareholding in an unlisted 
MII shall be divested as per the directions given by SEBI on case to case basis.  
 
5. The stock exchange or depository submitting application for listing of its securities 
to SEBI shall ensure strict compliance with Chapter VII of SECC Regulations, 2018 
and Chapter VIII of D&P Regulations, 2018  respectively.  
 
6. Applicability :  
 
6.1. The provisio ns of this circular shall come into effect from 90th day from the date 
of issuance of the circular . 
 
6.2. Paragraph 2.4 of Chapter 6 of the SEBI Master Circular No. 
SEBI/HO/MRD2/PoD -2/CIR/P/2023/171  dated October 16, 2023 for ‘Stock 
Exchanges and Clearing Corporations’ , paragraph 4.76 of Section 4 of SEBI 
Master Circular No. SEBI/HO/MRD/MRD -PoD-2/P/CIR/2023/166 dated October 
06, 2023  for ‘Depositories ’ and paragraph 15.1.1 (IV) & (V) of Chapter 15 of SEBI 
Master Circular No.  SEBI/HO/MRD/MRD -PoD-1/P/CIR/2023 /136 dated August 
04, 2023 for ‘Commodity Derivatives Segment’ shall stand rescinded with effect 
from the date of implementation of this circular ; and  
 
6.3. SEBI letter dated July 17, 2017 to Depositories and Stock Exchanges  on 
procedures for ensuring complian ce with SECC Regulations, 2018 and D&P  
Page 7 of 7 
 Regulations , 2018  shall stand rescinded with effect from the date of 
implementation of this circular.  
 
7. All MIIs are advised to:  
 
7.1. take necessary steps and put in place necessary systems for implementation of 
the above.  
7.2. Make necessary amendments to the relevant bye -laws, rules and regulations, 
wherever required, for the implementation of the above; and.  
7.3. bring the  provisions  of this circular  to the notice  of the market  participants 
(including investors) and disseminate the same on their website   
 
8. This circular is issued in exercise of the powers conferred under Section 11(1) of 
the Securities  and Exchange  Board  of India  Act 1992  read with Regulation  51 of 
the Securities  Contracts  (Regulation)  (Stock  Exchanges  and Clearin g 
Corporations) Regulations, 2018, Section 26(3) of the Depositories Act, 1996 and 
Regulation 97 of Securities and Exchange Board of India (Depositories and 
Participants) Regulations, 2018   to  protect   the  interests   of  investors   in  securities   
and  to  promote   the development of, and to regulate the securities market.  
 
9. This circular is available on SEBI website at www.sebi.gov.in  at “Legal Framework  
- Circulars.”  
 
Yours faithfully,  
 
 
Hruda Ranjan Sahoo  
Deputy General Manager  
Market Regulation Department  
Email: hrsahoo@sebi.gov.in  
Ph. No.022 -26449586  
 
 